Lingren deputy director of human flight services
at NASA. It's a huge privilege. Thank you so much,
Dr. Lingren. So, um, you're causing quite a stir
in Taiwan because you're not just an astronaut,
you're also half Taiwanese and Taiwan born. What's
it like to be back? Um, well, thank you. I It's
uh it's such a joy to be back. you know, uh
I was born here, lived here for two years,
uh as a young child, have had the opportunity to
visit family, uh in the 80s over the summer. Uh
the last time I was here was in '94 as a part of
a as a language exchange. And so it's been a long
time. Um but during my space flights, looking down
at the Earth, looking at places where I've lived,
places where I have family, places where I want
to visit, um I always looked for Taiwan. just
this beautiful, beautiful jewel uh in the in the
Pacific and enshrouded in mist and so grateful
now to be back on the ground uh at this place that
I was able that is so much a part of my past and
um just enamored by the views from space and we
all saw that photo that you that you sent of of
of Taiwan from space. You're here to encourage
Taiwan's space industry, the next generation
of scientists, engineers, and perhaps even
astronauts. Absolutely. Um it is such a unique
opportunity, such a privilege to get to serve as
an astronaut, to have the opportunity to to live
and work in space. Um and so it's a privilege to
share that to share that unique experience really
the human experience of of living and working
um in low earth orbit and to see the Earth from
that perspective. And so to share that message
uh to encourage um students uh investigators,
researchers on the importance of space, the
importance of partnership especially as we are
looking to return to the moon uh to to establish
sustainable presence and then looking onto Mars
and I believe that Taiwan can be an important
part of that. So, so what is it that makes NASA
want to work with Taiwan and what have you seen so
far on this trip that's impressed you? You know,
um NASA and the US is interested in partnering
with countries all around the world. Partnering
um part finding partners that are that that can
bring expertise and experience to the table.
uh we are exploring for humanity and we want
humanity the broad swath of partnerships to be
uh a part of this exploration. Um this has been
an amazing trip to visit uh this university to
see the experience they have in space and
really to learn about Taiwan's expertise
um and technology. Those are pieces that can be
a critical part of future exploration. Okay. And
just for our Taiwanese audience, you've only
been here since Tuesday, but have you managed
to do anything very Taiwanese like eating stinky
tofu or visiting a temple? Uh, absolutely. So,
we actually arrived Sunday, very early and uh and
so took both Sunday and Monday to to explore. So,
we did a three-hour walking tour on the
very first day, starting at Lchan Temple.
um made our way from uh all the way to the Chi
Kai-Shek Memorial. Uh we've definitely taken in
some bubble tea and uh and some of the local food
and it's been an absolute joy um to explore. And
was there any connection to your childhood eating
those foods again? Well, I remember very clearly,
especially when we visited in the 80s when I was
a young child, um roaming through the market and
seeing those little uh kind of bread cakes shaped
in the shape of animals and those sorts of things.
And so seeing that again um while we were walking
just brought back so many memories. Uh the other
piece of exploration that we did is we found
we went and found the the hospital where I was
born. And so connecting with that that location
was uh was very meaningful. So you said that
for as long as you can remember you've wanted
to be an astronaut and we're just showing now
uh a clip of three figurines that I understand
you take up into space. Can you describe to us or
tell tell us what in particular as a child that
really inspired you about Star Wars? You know,
I was inspired by science fiction. Um, I'm a Star
Wars kid. I loved reading science fiction, but it
wasn't really until second grade my teacher rolled
a television into our classroom and I got to see
the very first launch of the first space shuttle
in 1981. And that's when it clicked with me that
living and working in space wasn't fantasy, wasn't
science fiction, but a reality. And from that
point on, um, I was hooked. Um, in that interview
that we showed, we talk about how science fiction
inspires science fact. And so I wanted to go
into that a little bit more. Um, if scientists
and engineers are inspired by movie makers and
artists, what does that say about the power of
imagination and its role in science, in space? Oh,
I think imagination um is critical to the process,
you know, to be inspired by some some idea that
a writer um has and then to see that on film,
to want to be a part of that and then someday to
see that come true. You know, Arth Arthur C. Clark
and the idea of uh communication satellites
and that's where we are today and and so
um the things that we see when we were young
the things that we are inspired by um are things
that we pursue in education and in our careers.
And so that I think that circle is so important
uh to be inspired by the imagination of others
to make those things come true to further inspire
writers and then engineers of the future. Yeah.
Mention also Clark and then there's Jules Burn and
even Star. Absolutely. Um let's talk about Artist.
Yes. So you work intimately closely with these
astronauts preparing them for their journey. You
also as we know did two space missions yourself
um over 300 days. That's right. In space.
So as you watched the crew and that you know
making of history, what were the emotions that you
yourself felt? Oh boy. Uh so proud of this crew,
so proud of the team. Um so that crew is
represents hundreds if not thousands of
uh people investing thousands if not millions of
hours in preparing for this mission. Uh and so so
proud of the team that that executed that that
got the crew safely around the back side of the
moon and back to Earth. Um, it was so powerful
and for anyone that watched that crew work,
communicate with the Earth, expressed their views
of the moon as they were going around the backside
describing the the solar eclipse. Um that is
what makes human space flight so compelling
is the human element that somebody from our
species, one of our friends, our colleagues,
our teammates is experiencing that and sharing
their thoughts and feelings of having gone
through that. Um that is why that storytelling
is what makes human space flight so important.
Following on from that, um we hear about the
profound changes, profound change that astronauts
have sort of um psychologically um as they look
down more than 10,000 kilometers um onto Earth.
Um can you tell us about that as well as the
concept of Earth as our spaceship? Absolutely.
I think that your experience with the over effect
overview effect really depends on what thoughts
beliefs you carry as you go on your mission. Some
people feel disconnected from the earth, very
alone. For myself, looking back at the earth, I
felt very connected. But really the most profound
element was looking at the earth and its absolute
beauty. But recognizing that on the space station,
this vehicle that provides us with air to breathe
and food to eat and the protection from from the
harsh environment outside, we spend 30% of our
time taking care of the space station because if
it breaks, the crew inside dies. We depend on the
space station for our life. And then as you look
at the Earth, there is nothing like it in our in
our vicinity. It is and all of humanity is there.
It is humanity's spaceship. But I think that
very few of us spend 30% of our time taking
care of this spaceship, spaceship earth. Um it the
resources are not inexhaustible. They are limited
and the the believing the belief that I came back
with is that we need to do a better job taking
care of humanity spaceship. Um it's a privileged
um position career um to be an astronaut. Um,
can you tell us how NASA chooses particular
astronauts for these missions? I mean,
for Optimus 4 when humans will go back to
the moon, I expect every single astronaut
in the US would put their hand up. So, how
absolutely. Yeah, it's very challenging. Um,
and you're absolutely right. It is a privilege.
It is absolute privilege to to be able to serve
as a NASA astronaut to have that opportunity to
live and work in space. Um and you're absolutely
right that every every one of our astronauts
will be interested in being a part of that
atom Artemis landing. Um, we have the benefit of
choosing from the very best and brightest into
the astronaut corps and we have the the privilege
of choosing the very best and brightest and and
those that have the skill and expertise that is
going to be needed for that particular mission
um to be selected for for that landing mission.
So, uh it'll be a difficult choice, but we've
got an amazing group of of uh professionals to
choose from. Would you like to go yourself? Oh,
I'd love to. The third mission is that is
that very rare to go on three missions? Um,
not necessarily. Uh, but at this point, I'm
serving in a leadership role and as the deputy
director of the flight operations directorate.
And so, um, my priority is to serve where the
agency and the country needs me. And so, if that's
serving in leadership, that's what I'll do. If
tell me about um how space takes a toll on your
body and your mind and also if you can look at
that through the fact that as you mentioned
the next destination will be Mars. How would
that change these impacts? Absolutely. You know,
I think that for most of us, the biggest challenge
of being in space for five, six, 12 months is
really being away from our families. And the
team does an amazing job of allowing us to connect
with our families through a phone system, through
video chats, um through uh care packages. As I
think about that long duration flight to Mars,
it will continue to be even more challenging
because we are going to be further away from the
Earth, increasing our communications latency. Um,
we're not going to have the Earth to look at every
day. Uh, but I have faith in our psychological our
behavioral health support team, our mental health
trying to tie in your mom. Absolutely. Um your
journey hasn't always been smooth and I believe
that this has also shaped you as an astronaut. Um
you spoken about uh one of the um lowest points in
your life. You describe that as being a cursive
day. Yeah. the darkest day of your life. Um,
but you see it now as a blessing in Can you
tell us about how your mom might have helped
you through this and what influence she has been
on your career? Many people in Taiwan think that
she must be a tiger mom because you're not just
an astronaut, but you're also a doctor. You have
multiple degrees. You have 24 years of cumulative
um higher education. this morning you said you
were top of your class in the Air Force. Oh, I I
definitely was not at the top of my class at the
Air Force Academy. Um but uh graduated high enough
to be able to go to pilot training, you know. Uh
so grateful to my parents um for their support and
instruction. Uh I would not describe my mom as a
tiger mom. um what she did and what my parents
did was really support my choices. Never telling
me what I needed to do um but telling me if there
was something that I wanted to do, if I had a goal
that I just needed to work hard um to to pursue it
and then supported me in pursuing that goal. So uh
I feel privileged and grateful um for support the
support that uh my parents provided in um really
providing the environment for me to excel and uh
creating in me a joy for learning uh for curiosity
for exploration and enabling me to pursue um
this path that I've pursued. And very finally a
shout out to uh those in Taiwan as well as in the
Indo Pacific, our audience who dream of space. Um